---
layout: post
category: Industry Talk
tags: [AI in the media, data scientists, singularity]
---

# How the buzz about AI increases the pressure on data teams.

Every article about AI now starts with something like this: *[Consulting company XZ] expects AI to replace [XY millions] of jobs by yeat [X, on average before your retirment to be scary enough, but not so close that anyone would remember the article when that year comes].* If you write an article about AI you also want to mention at least one of the following buzz words: *deep learning, IBM Watson, singularity, neural networks, IOT*. If that is not enough to keep your readers interest, you may want to target different groups with specific catch phrases. *You have kids? Better teach your kids how to code or they will be unemployed forever. You are not in a "creative" sector of the economy? Better go back to college. You don't care about all this talk about AI because you have been retired for 20 years? Keep on reading because your doctor might soon be a robot.* The only thing being replaced en masse are immigrants as the number one source of exaggerated fears. 

Recently The Guardian titled: *"What jobs will still be around in 20 years. Read this to prepare your future"* Here is my two cents. Don't plan your future on an article in a newspaper. (What kid in elementary school says: "When I grow up I want to become a telemarketer!" anyway? You would hope, kids have no idea what that even is.) Do whatever you want to do. And if you can't get a job, you can always become a "scientific writer", or a professional blogger. 

For data scientists in traditional companies, who are not developing AI products, this poses a different kind of challenge. The question I am hearing from colleagues in all kinds of industries is basically the following: If AI is going to dominate the world in a few years, why are we still struggling with the basics? 

There are many answers to this question. Companies don't have the knowledge in-house or their data architecture is not tailored towards entreprise analytics. But, the reason that the gap between expectations and reality is widening is partly because all these articles only show the advancements in artificial intelligence without mentioning the level of effort it took to to achieve them. While the advancements are significant, the effort that goes into them is even more mind-boggling. The kinds of resources (including intellectual) Google and other major players use to train neural nets with billions of nodes are avilable to a handful of companies. And even these networks aren't the magic bullet people think they are. Most companies, given the tasks they are currently interested in (i.e. that produce quick revenue), will see negligible increases in predictive power and even less in revenue if they would simply scale out their resources and start training gigantic neural networks. Even if done properly, using all the tricks out there to make them work, these gains will not be justifiable by any measure. Expectations are exploding, but the data most traditional companies have available aren't. Their data doesn't get better, it doesn't get richer. It doesn't encode significantly more information. It only slowly gets more. 

If your company doesn't own vast amounts of diverse data (I'm talking Google, Baidu) , expectations should increase in pace with the information contained in your data. Not with the number of articles about AI. What should increase with that metric, however, is the number of hours you, as a data scientist, invest into learning new tools and techniques and keeping up with latest research. Because when you get that shiny new dataset, you better be ready. **Or AI will replace you!** Just kidding. Or not.